ARCH.md, before:

# Architecture for PCOT prototype

This document briefly describes the architecture of the PCOT prototype,
discussing the main classes and how certain complex operations are performed
(e.g. serialisation and deserialisation, aka. saving and loading). It 
does not discuss how to use the program and is intended for people who
wish to write more plugin modules, fix bugs or add features.

## Module and package architecture

The main top-level modules of the program are:

* **main** contains the main window user interface code.
* **xform** contains the data model definition, i.e. how the nodes, node types
and graph fit together. All UI code is in other modules. Note that the
graph nodes are correctly referred to as **xform nodes** (transform nodes).
* **graphscene** contains the code for managing the Qt Graphics Scene
objects for the graph view panel, and handling user interface actions for
those objects.
* **graphview** contains code for managing view-level events for the graph
view panel, and as such is tightly coupled to graphscene.
* **palette** handles the note type palette - the list of node types visible
next to the graph view.

There the following subpackages:

* **ui** contains user interface utility types for managing dockable tabs,
matplotlib widgets, OpenCV canvas widgets etc.
* **utils** contains utility classes which are not user interface elements
(such as hierarchical clustering)
* **xforms** contains the node type definitions, which are all automatically
imported and registered. This will be described in more detail below.

In addition, the **assets** directory contains the user interface **.ui** files
which describe the user interface layouts for various windows and tabs.
These are XML files created in Qt Designer.

The **grandalf** package, if installed, will be used to perform automatic
layout of nodes when requested. It is, however, a GPL product and is therefore
not included by default. Without it, autolayout will be extremely crude.

## The Model

### XForm nodes

The data model is a directed acyclic graph consisting of transformation
nodes which act on data. The entire graph is an object of class 
**XFormGraph**. Each node is an object of type **XForm**.
Each node type is a singleton subclass of **XFormType**, and each 
individual node has a link to the appropriate node type object.
Thus the different node types' behaviours are handled by the node type
object to which the node is connected, not by the node itself (this may
seem a slightly odd architecture, but using inheritance polymorphism to
achieve this - i.e. subclasses of XNode - introduces more problems) (favour composition over inheritance).

Each XForm node is primarily connected to others in the graph through its
inputs: the **inputs** attribute contains an array of tuple pairs (node,index)
where *node* is the connected node and *index* is the index of the output
connection on that node. Each node also contains some information about
its output connections in the **children** dict: this is a dictionary mapping
from node to an integer number of connections. If there is no connection,
there is no dictionary entry. Consider two nodes A and B.
If node A's output 2 is connected to node B's input 1, the relevant
data is:
* Entry 1 in node B's inputs array will contain (A,2)
* The children dictionary in node A will contain B:1, indicating that node
A has a single outgoing connection to node B.

### XFormType objects

The **xforms** directory contains the node type definition modules. Each
module contains the definition of an XFormType subclass, preceded by 
the **@xformtype** decorator. This decorator automatically constructs
the only instance of the class, redirects the constructor call to return
this instance, and also calculates the MD5 checksum of the source code for
the file, storing it in the singleton. The XFormType constructor also
registers the class by name in the **allTypes** dictionary at startup.

Therefore it should not be necessary to refer to any XFormType subclass
in the code directly: when a node is created, the XForm constructor
looks up the node in the dictionary and creates the required linkage.

Each XFormType subclass **must** define the following methods:
* **__init\_\_(self,name,ver)**: the constructor for the type, which
runs at startup. This should take a unique name for the type and a
three-part version number (see Versioning below).
* **init(self,xform)**: given an XForm node, initialise attributes within the
node which are private to this type. In other words, initialise the node.
* **perform(self,xform)**: perform the node's action, reading inputs and
generating outputs for that node. The former is done using **getInput**,
the latter with **setOutput** on the node. Typically this also stores the data in the node itself for display by the node's tab.
Once perform() has run on a node (and all connected outputs are set), it is also run
on the child nodes. Thus a change high up in the graph will percolate down.
This may slow things down in complex graphs, and I'm looking into ways
of ameliorating this.
* **createTab(self,xform)**: create the user interface tab. Occasionally
a node type may omit this if there is no reasonable user interface at all,
but his is very rare. The result should be a subclass of **ui.tabs.Tab**, a
dockable tab.

It may also implement:

* **generateOutputTypes(self,xform)**: some nodes may change their output
types depending on their inputs. This is called when an input connection
is made or broken, and uses either **changeOutputType(outindex,typeobj)**
to achieve this, or more commonly **matchOutputsToInputs()**. This latter
method takes a list of pairs of input and output indices and makes the 
latter the same type as the former.
* **recalculate(xform)** is used if internal data to a node should be changed
after the node UI has been edited or it has been loaded (a typical example
is lookup tables). It is called in onNodeChanged() in the tab class, and
also when the node is loaded. In the former case this should be done after
the controls in the tab are read, but before changing any status displays.
* **serialise(xform)** is used to serialise additional data on saving.
It should return a dict of names to plain data (see the [JSON Python documentation](https://docs.python.org/3/library/json.html)
for what can be serialised). It should be avoided if possible, see below.
* **deserialise(xform,d)** is used to deserialise additional data serialised
with serialise(). 

#### Automatic serialisation

Any "plain data" in the node which should be saved
(see the Python JSON docs) can be serialised and deserialised automaticaly
by listing the attribute names in a tuple called **autoserialise**. This
should be set up in the XFormType's constructor. This approach is favoured
over implementing the **serialise** and **deserialise** members, which
should only be used when the data requires extra processing.

### The xforms package

All Python files in this package directory with names of the form **xform\<name\>.py** 
are transform node (and associated UI) definitions, and are loaded automatically 
from the **__init()\_\_** function of the package. This makes it easy to extend
the program: simply write new node types in this directory. 

#### Versioning

Users can edit node type code, which may cause
data products to change. Two measures are taken to avoid this:
* Each node type must provide a **ver** attribute, set in the node type constructor. 
This is not used for version checking, merely to provide a reference. This
is a three part [semantic version](https://semver.org/):
    * MAJOR version when you make incompatible API changes,
    * MINOR version when you add functionality in a backwards compatible manner, and
    * PATCH version when you make backwards compatible bug fixes.
* An MD5 checksum is automatically generated for each node type's source file as it
is loaded, and these are saved when the graph is saved. If, on loading, the saved
checksum of a node does not match the current checksum, a warning is shown along with
the version numbers for both saved and current nodes.

**<font color="red">TODO: what happens with nodes with changing in/out counts between
versions, or nodes that can't be loaded?</font>**


### XFormType user interfaces 

Each XFormType object should be able to create a user interface for a node
of its type with its **createTab** method. This should create a tab object
of a subclass of **ui.tabs.Tab** defined in the xform's own module (however,
the generic **xforms.TabImage** is available for nodes which have no controls and a single
RGB image output). 

The subclass should implement **onNodeChanged**, which should update all the tab's
controls from the actual data stored in the node. Similarly, the tab should contain
code to update the node from the controls when they change (this can be achieved through
Qt's signals/slots mechanism: see the code for examples). 
When the node is changed from the tab in this way it should be commanded to perform().
The UI should be loaded from a Qt Designer file in the constructor by calling the superclass
constructor with an appropriate filename. Note that it will actually be loaded into
the **w** member - the tab widget - so controls should be accessed with **self.w.\<name\>**.
If complex internal data changes
when controls are updated, the recalculate() method in the node type can be implemented.


### Examples
A minimal example is **xforms/xformsink.py**, which simply displays an image. It is given in
its entirety below:
```python
import cv2 as cv
import numpy as np

import ui,ui.tabs,ui.canvas
from xform import xformtype,XFormType
from xforms.tabimage import TabImage

# The node type itself, a subclass of XFormType with the @xformtype decorator which will
# calculate a checksum of this source file and automatically create the only instance which
# can exist of this class (it's a singleton).

@xformtype
class XformSink(XFormType):
    def __init__(self):
        # call superconstructor with the type name and version code
        super().__init__("sink","0.0.0")
        # set up a single input which takes an image of any type. The connector could have
        # a name in more complex node types, but here we just have an empty string.
        self.addInputConnector("","img")

    # this creates a tab when we want to control or view a node of this type. This uses
    # the built-in TabImage, which contains an OpenCV image viewer.
    def createTab(self,n):
        return TabImage(n)

    # actually perform a node's action, which happens when any of the nodes "upstream" are changed
    # and on loading.
    def perform(self,node):
        # get the input (index 0, our first and only input). That's all - we just store a reference
        # to the image in the node. The TabImage knows how to display nodes with "img" attributes,
        # and does the rest.
        node.img = node.getInput(0)
    def init(self,node):
        # initialise the node by setting its img to None.
        node.img = None
```


* A full example of a node type is given in **xforms/xformcontrast.py**, which has a single
control, displays as image and performs a simple contrast stretch. It is fully commented.
* The most complex node (from the point of view of user interface) is currently **xformcrop.py**,
which allows a user to draw a crop rectangle on the image canvas; the cropped image is sent
to the output. This requires holding a **croprect** datum giving the crop rectangle position
and size, and handling the extra painting and mouse events via setting the appropriate hooks
in the canvas. See the code for details.

## Images and regions of interest

Images are passed as objects of class *Image* in the *pancamimages*
module, rather than as raw numpy arrays. This is necessary to allow
images to contain region of interest masks. To wrap a numpy image in
an Image object, just call
```python
img = Image(numpy_array)
```
and to get the underlying image back, use
```python
img.img
```
Regions of interest add data to the Image object. Each ROI node type
(rectangle, ellipse etc.) adds a new ROI and (optionally) an annotation
is drawn into the image around it. Any subsequent operation on the image
will act only on the ROIs, and may then remove them from the image.
Thus we can have a sequence
```
source->rectangle->rectangle->histequal
```
which will perform histogram equalisation on the union of two rectangles.
This doesn't always make sense, though: in cases like split and merge nodes, for example.
Nodes are free to behave slightly differently, but when performing an action only
on a region of an image does make sense, this should be done.

Regions of interest are stored as an *rois* list attribute in the Image,
and there are some utility methods for working with them. A common pattern is:
```python
    def perform(self,node):
        # read the image
        img = node.getInput(0)
        if img is not None:
            # if all is well, extract the subimage object
            subimage = img.subimage()
            
            # from the subimage, extract the actual numpy subimage 
            # (which is a rect bounding all the ROIs) and the mask
            # saying which pixels are actually in the ROIs. This is
            # the full mask - expanded to as many channels as required.
            # There is also a "mask" attribute which is single channel.

            subimgarray = subimage.img
            subimgmask = subimage.fullmask()
            
            # create a masked array; note the logical flip of the mask.
            # Our mask has True meaning Unmasked, while  the numpy masked
            # array uses False to mean Unmasked.
            
            masked = np.ma.masked_array(subimgarray,mask=~subimgmask)
            
            # perform some manipulation on the subimage, here we'll divide it
            # by 10.
            
            cp = subimgarray.copy() # the original subimage
            masked = masked / 10.0  # divide the masked area
            np.putmask(cp,subimgmask,masked) # put the changed area into the copy
            
            # now copy the modifed subimage back into the original image,
            # making a new Image, which is our output
            
            node.img = img.modifyWithSub(subimage,cp)
        else:

            # there was no input image
            
            node.img = None
        
        node.setOutput(0,node.img)
```



## Image source data

Images also contain a history of their external original sources.
These are in the **sources** attribute, and consist of a set (not a list)
of tuples, *(path,filter)*. The **filter** term is a string
identifying a Pancam filter, e.g. "L01".
These are automatically build in the sourcing
nodes, and should be rebuilt and added to as nodes construct or
manipulate images. Many functions and methods, such as the **modifySubImage**,
will do this for you. Otherwise you will need to work out how to modify the sources
and add them to the Image constructor.

Here's what Merge does:

```python
        # lst is a list of Images - we create a union of all the source
        # sets.

        sources = set.union(*[x.sources for x in lst])

        # and pass that to our new Image constructor.

        node.img = Image(cv.merge([x.img for x in lst]),sources)
```

The golden rule is to **think about sources** when you construct a new Image. The constructor
will happily accept no sources, however.

Commit message:

Image sources are now a list indexed by channel of sets of Source objects, each of which contains filename and filter position.

ARCH.md, after:

# Architecture for PCOT prototype

This document briefly describes the architecture of the PCOT prototype,
discussing the main classes and how certain complex operations are performed
(e.g. serialisation and deserialisation, aka. saving and loading). It 
does not discuss how to use the program and is intended for people who
wish to write more plugin modules, fix bugs or add features.

## Module and package architecture

The main top-level modules of the program are:

* **main** contains the main window user interface code.
* **xform** contains the data model definition, i.e. how the nodes, node types
and graph fit together. All UI code is in other modules. Note that the
graph nodes are correctly referred to as **xform nodes** (transform nodes).
* **graphscene** contains the code for managing the Qt Graphics Scene
objects for the graph view panel, and handling user interface actions for
those objects.
* **graphview** contains code for managing view-level events for the graph
view panel, and as such is tightly coupled to graphscene.
* **palette** handles the note type palette - the list of node types visible
next to the graph view.

There the following subpackages:

* **ui** contains user interface utility types for managing dockable tabs,
matplotlib widgets, OpenCV canvas widgets etc.
* **utils** contains utility classes which are not user interface elements
(such as hierarchical clustering)
* **xforms** contains the node type definitions, which are all automatically
imported and registered. This will be described in more detail below.

In addition, the **assets** directory contains the user interface **.ui** files
which describe the user interface layouts for various windows and tabs.
These are XML files created in Qt Designer.

The **grandalf** package, if installed, will be used to perform automatic
layout of nodes when requested. It is, however, a GPL product and is therefore
not included by default. Without it, autolayout will be extremely crude.

## The Model

### XForm nodes

The data model is a directed acyclic graph consisting of transformation
nodes which act on data. The entire graph is an object of class 
**XFormGraph**. Each node is an object of type **XForm**.
Each node type is a singleton subclass of **XFormType**, and each 
individual node has a link to the appropriate node type object.
Thus the different node types' behaviours are handled by the node type
object to which the node is connected, not by the node itself (this may
seem a slightly odd architecture, but using inheritance polymorphism to
achieve this - i.e. subclasses of XNode - introduces more problems) (favour composition over inheritance).

Each XForm node is primarily connected to others in the graph through its
inputs: the **inputs** attribute contains an array of tuple pairs (node,index)
where *node* is the connected node and *index* is the index of the output
connection on that node. Each node also contains some information about
its output connections in the **children** dict: this is a dictionary mapping
from node to an integer number of connections. If there is no connection,
there is no dictionary entry. Consider two nodes A and B.
If node A's output 2 is connected to node B's input 1, the relevant
data is:
* Entry 1 in node B's inputs array will contain (A,2)
* The children dictionary in node A will contain B:1, indicating that node
A has a single outgoing connection to node B.

### XFormType objects

The **xforms** directory contains the node type definition modules. Each
module contains the definition of an XFormType subclass, preceded by 
the **@xformtype** decorator. This decorator automatically constructs
the only instance of the class, redirects the constructor call to return
this instance, and also calculates the MD5 checksum of the source code for
the file, storing it in the singleton. The XFormType constructor also
registers the class by name in the **allTypes** dictionary at startup.

Therefore it should not be necessary to refer to any XFormType subclass
in the code directly: when a node is created, the XForm constructor
looks up the node in the dictionary and creates the required linkage.

Each XFormType subclass **must** define the following methods:
* **__init\_\_(self,name,ver)**: the constructor for the type, which
runs at startup. This should take a unique name for the type and a
three-part version number (see Versioning below).
* **init(self,xform)**: given an XForm node, initialise attributes within the
node which are private to this type. In other words, initialise the node.
* **perform(self,xform)**: perform the node's action, reading inputs and
generating outputs for that node. The former is done using **getInput**,
the latter with **setOutput** on the node. Typically this also stores the data in the node itself for display by the node's tab.
Once perform() has run on a node (and all connected outputs are set), it is also run
on the child nodes. Thus a change high up in the graph will percolate down.
This may slow things down in complex graphs, and I'm looking into ways
of ameliorating this.
* **createTab(self,xform)**: create the user interface tab. Occasionally
a node type may omit this if there is no reasonable user interface at all,
but his is very rare. The result should be a subclass of **ui.tabs.Tab**, a
dockable tab.

It may also implement:

* **generateOutputTypes(self,xform)**: some nodes may change their output
types depending on their inputs. This is called when an input connection
is made or broken, and uses either **changeOutputType(outindex,typeobj)**
to achieve this, or more commonly **matchOutputsToInputs()**. This latter
method takes a list of pairs of input and output indices and makes the 
latter the same type as the former.
* **recalculate(xform)** is used if internal data to a node should be changed
after the node UI has been edited or it has been loaded (a typical example
is lookup tables). It is called in onNodeChanged() in the tab class, and
also when the node is loaded. In the former case this should be done after
the controls in the tab are read, but before changing any status displays.
* **serialise(xform)** is used to serialise additional data on saving.
It should return a dict of names to plain data (see the [JSON Python documentation](https://docs.python.org/3/library/json.html)
for what can be serialised). It should be avoided if possible, see below.
* **deserialise(xform,d)** is used to deserialise additional data serialised
with serialise(). 

#### Automatic serialisation

Any "plain data" in the node which should be saved
(see the Python JSON docs) can be serialised and deserialised automaticaly
by listing the attribute names in a tuple called **autoserialise**. This
should be set up in the XFormType's constructor. This approach is favoured
over implementing the **serialise** and **deserialise** members, which
should only be used when the data requires extra processing.

### The xforms package

All Python files in this package directory with names of the form **xform\<name\>.py** 
are transform node (and associated UI) definitions, and are loaded automatically 
from the **__init()\_\_** function of the package. This makes it easy to extend
the program: simply write new node types in this directory. 

#### Versioning

Users can edit node type code, which may cause
data products to change. Two measures are taken to avoid this:
* Each node type must provide a **ver** attribute, set in the node type constructor. 
This is not used for version checking, merely to provide a reference. This
is a three part [semantic version](https://semver.org/):
    * MAJOR version when you make incompatible API changes,
    * MINOR version when you add functionality in a backwards compatible manner, and
    * PATCH version when you make backwards compatible bug fixes.
* An MD5 checksum is automatically generated for each node type's source file as it
is loaded, and these are saved when the graph is saved. If, on loading, the saved
checksum of a node does not match the current checksum, a warning is shown along with
the version numbers for both saved and current nodes.

**<font color="red">TODO: what happens with nodes with changing in/out counts between
versions, or nodes that can't be loaded?</font>**


### XFormType user interfaces 

Each XFormType object should be able to create a user interface for a node
of its type with its **createTab** method. This should create a tab object
of a subclass of **ui.tabs.Tab** defined in the xform's own module (however,
the generic **xforms.TabImage** is available for nodes which have no controls and a single
RGB image output). 

The subclass should implement **onNodeChanged**, which should update all the tab's
controls from the actual data stored in the node. Similarly, the tab should contain
code to update the node from the controls when they change (this can be achieved through
Qt's signals/slots mechanism: see the code for examples). 
When the node is changed from the tab in this way it should be commanded to perform().
The UI should be loaded from a Qt Designer file in the constructor by calling the superclass
constructor with an appropriate filename. Note that it will actually be loaded into
the **w** member - the tab widget - so controls should be accessed with **self.w.\<name\>**.
If complex internal data changes
when controls are updated, the recalculate() method in the node type can be implemented.


### Examples
A minimal example is **xforms/xformsink.py**, which simply displays an image. It is given in
its entirety below:
```python
import cv2 as cv
import numpy as np

import ui,ui.tabs,ui.canvas
from xform import xformtype,XFormType
from xforms.tabimage import TabImage

# The node type itself, a subclass of XFormType with the @xformtype decorator which will
# calculate a checksum of this source file and automatically create the only instance which
# can exist of this class (it's a singleton).

@xformtype
class XformSink(XFormType):
    def __init__(self):
        # call superconstructor with the type name and version code
        super().__init__("sink","0.0.0")
        # set up a single input which takes an image of any type. The connector could have
        # a name in more complex node types, but here we just have an empty string.
        self.addInputConnector("","img")

    # this creates a tab when we want to control or view a node of this type. This uses
    # the built-in TabImage, which contains an OpenCV image viewer.
    def createTab(self,n):
        return TabImage(n)

    # actually perform a node's action, which happens when any of the nodes "upstream" are changed
    # and on loading.
    def perform(self,node):
        # get the input (index 0, our first and only input). That's all - we just store a reference
        # to the image in the node. The TabImage knows how to display nodes with "img" attributes,
        # and does the rest.
        node.img = node.getInput(0)
    def init(self,node):
        # initialise the node by setting its img to None.
        node.img = None
```


* A full example of a node type is given in **xforms/xformcontrast.py**, which has a single
control, displays as image and performs a simple contrast stretch. It is fully commented.
* The most complex node (from the point of view of user interface) is currently **xformcrop.py**,
which allows a user to draw a crop rectangle on the image canvas; the cropped image is sent
to the output. This requires holding a **croprect** datum giving the crop rectangle position
and size, and handling the extra painting and mouse events via setting the appropriate hooks
in the canvas. See the code for details.

## Images and regions of interest

Images are passed as objects of class *Image* in the *pancamimages*
module, rather than as raw numpy arrays. This is necessary to allow
images to contain region of interest masks. To wrap a numpy image in
an Image object, just call
```python
img = Image(numpy_array)
```
and to get the underlying image back, use
```python
img.img
```
Regions of interest add data to the Image object. Each ROI node type
(rectangle, ellipse etc.) adds a new ROI and (optionally) an annotation
is drawn into the image around it. Any subsequent operation on the image
will act only on the ROIs, and may then remove them from the image.
Thus we can have a sequence
```
source->rectangle->rectangle->histequal
```
which will perform histogram equalisation on the union of two rectangles.
This doesn't always make sense, though: in cases like split and merge nodes, for example.
Nodes are free to behave slightly differently, but when performing an action only
on a region of an image does make sense, this should be done.

Regions of interest are stored as an *rois* list attribute in the Image,
and there are some utility methods for working with them. A common pattern is:
```python
    def perform(self,node):
        # read the image
        img = node.getInput(0)
        if img is not None:
            # if all is well, extract the subimage object
            subimage = img.subimage()
            
            # from the subimage, extract the actual numpy subimage 
            # (which is a rect bounding all the ROIs) and the mask
            # saying which pixels are actually in the ROIs. This is
            # the full mask - expanded to as many channels as required.
            # There is also a "mask" attribute which is single channel.

            subimgarray = subimage.img
            subimgmask = subimage.fullmask()
            
            # create a masked array; note the logical flip of the mask.
            # Our mask has True meaning Unmasked, while  the numpy masked
            # array uses False to mean Unmasked.
            
            masked = np.ma.masked_array(subimgarray,mask=~subimgmask)
            
            # perform some manipulation on the subimage, here we'll divide it
            # by 10.
            
            cp = subimgarray.copy() # the original subimage
            masked = masked / 10.0  # divide the masked area
            np.putmask(cp,subimgmask,masked) # put the changed area into the copy
            
            # now copy the modifed subimage back into the original image,
            # making a new Image, which is our output
            
            node.img = img.modifyWithSub(subimage,cp)
        else:

            # there was no input image
            
            node.img = None
        
        node.setOutput(0,node.img)
```



## Image source data

Images also contain a history of their external original sources.
These are in the **sources** attribute, and consist of a set (not a list)
of tuples, *(path,filter)*. The **filter** term is a string
identifying a Pancam filter, e.g. "L01".
These are automatically build in the sourcing
nodes, and should be rebuilt and added to as nodes construct or
manipulate images. Many functions and methods, such as the **modifySubImage**,
will do this for you. Otherwise you will need to work out how to modify the sources
and add them to the Image constructor.

Here's what Merge does (note, source handling is out of date now)

```python
        # lst is a list of Images - we create a union of all the source
        # sets.

        sources = set.union(*[x.sources for x in lst])

        # and pass that to our new Image constructor.

        node.img = Image(cv.merge([x.img for x in lst]),sources)
```

The golden rule is to **think about sources** when you construct a new Image. The constructor
will happily accept no sources, however.
