docsite/content/docs/maths/index.md, before:

---
date: 2021-07-13
title: Image import maths
summary: This page describes how images are processed from import until reflectance.
tags: ["pcot","mars","python"]
---

{{<katex>}}


{{< figure src="process.png" title="Image import and calibration">}}

## Step 1: Import

Multispectral images are first downloaded from the DAR or imported from
disk files (either as ENVI or separate PNG files). Such images may have up
to 11 bands.

## Step 2: Flat-fielding

Each camera has a set of pixel-to-pixel nonconformities which must be removed.
This is done by using a set of flat-field images, one per filter. Processing
is done by normalising each flat-field image (so each has a mean of 1) and
then dividing each band by the normalised flat-field for that band:
$$
Y = \frac{X}{|F|}
$$
{{<important>}}
Note: need more detail on how this normalisation is done. I also assume
we're storing the normalised data.
{{</important>}}

## Step 3: Conversion to radiance
We now produce a calibrated radiance image (W.m<sup>2</sup>.sr.nm). This
can be used directly (I believe) or carried forward. We use the equation[^1]
$$
Y_{\lambda} = \frac{k(t)X}{e_{\lambda}}
$$
in which
* $Y_\lambda$ is the output ($\lambda$ is the filter number)
* $k(t)$ is a radiance conversion coefficient dependent on the camera CCD's
temperature $t$
* $X$ is the input image (in *digital numbers*)
* $e_\lambda$ is the exposure time for filter $\lambda$


Here, $t$ and $e_\lambda$ come directly from image metadata, and
$k(t)$ will probably be a lookup table.
{{<important>}}
How do we get $k(t)$? It is likely to be something like
$$
k(t) = k_0 + k_s t
$$
from [2].
{{</important>}}


## Step 4: calculating illumination coefficients
Ideally, these should be captured from the image itself although
it's possible (?) that multiple images could share the same
coefficients if they are part of the same set (taken at the same time).

{{<important>}}
This is where it gets complicated, and I may have missed the point here
because it looks like the MER method (older) is much more complicated
than the method described in [1]. 
{{</important>}}

### The MER way (from paper [2])
* First, we have a BRDF model of the reflectance of the calibration targets.
That's a function $f_r(\omega_i, \omega_r)$ which (simply put) gives us the
ratio of light out to light in for all possible incidence and
reflection vectors (vector-to-light and vector-to-eye).
* We also have to factor dust composition into this, since it will modify
the BRDF.
* Analysts then select ROIs for each calibration target patch in each
filter band (well, obviously you can do this with one selection across
each multispectral image). Mean and SD of pixel values within each ROI
are calculated.
* For each filter, we then plot the measured values against the predicted values for each
patch. This should fit a line constrained through the origin (because black
should equal black). The fit is checked by analysts, and the slope of the line $m$ 
can be used to convert from radiance to [IoF]({{<relref "../glossary/#iof">}})
$$
IoF = r\cdot m \cdot \cos(i)
$$
where $r$ is the radiance, $m$ is the slope of the line, and $i$ is the
incidence angle at the calibration target. We can then get $ R^* $ from
this by dividing by $\cos(i)$, so
$$
R^* = r\cdot m
$$

### The ExoSpec way (from paper [1])
* Again, analysts select ROIs for each calibration target patch in each filter band, and obtain mean and
variance for pixel values within each ROI for each band. We then fit lines, and the paper seems to provide some
maths:
$$
\Delta = \sum_i \frac{1}{\sigma^2_i} \sum_i \frac{\rho^2_i}{\sigma^2_i}-\(\sum_i \frac{\rho^2_i}{\sigma^2_i}\)^2
$$
where $\sigma^2_i$ is the variance for patch ROI $i$ and $\rho_i$ is the lab-measured reflectance for that patch. This means that 
ROIs with larger uncertainty contribute less.
{{<important>}}I'd love a citation for this fitting technique.{{</important>}}
Now we can do this:
$$
m = \frac{
\sum_i \frac{1}{\sigma^2_i}
\sum_i \frac{\rho_i s_i}{\sigma^2_i}-
\sum_i \frac{\rho_i}{\sigma^2_i}
\sum_i \frac{s_i}{\sigma^2_i}
}{\Delta}
$$
and
$$
c = \frac{
\sum_i \frac{\rho^2_i}{\sigma^2_i}
\sum_i \frac{s_i}{\sigma^2_i}-
\sum_i \frac{\rho_i}{\sigma^2_i}
\sum_i \frac{\rho_i s_i}{\sigma^2_i}
}{\Delta}
$$
where $s_i$ is the mean signal in W.m<sup>2</sup>.sr.nm for each ROI $i$. We can also obtain uncertainties in the form
of standard deviations of $m$ and $c$:
$$
\sigma_m = \sqrt{\frac{\sum_i \frac{1}{\sigma_i^2}}{\Delta}}
$$
and
$$
\sigma_c = \sqrt{\frac{\sum_i \frac{\rho_i^2}{\sigma_i^2}}{\Delta}}
$$


Sources: 
1. [Allender, Elyse J., et al. "The ExoMars spectral tool (ExoSpec): An image analysis tool for ExoMars 2020 PanCam imagery." Image and Signal Processing for Remote Sensing XXIV. Vol. 10789. International Society for Optics and Photonics, 2018.](https://research-repository.st-andrews.ac.uk/bitstream/handle/10023/16973/Allender_2018_ExoMars_SPIE_107890I.pdf)
2. [Bell III, James F., et al. "In-flight calibration and performance of the Mars Exploration Rover Panoramic Camera (Pancam) instruments." Journal of Geophysical Research: Planets 111.E2 (2006).](https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdfdirect/10.1029/2005JE002444)

[^1]: This equation is given in Allender et al. as 
$$
RC_{\lambda} = K(T) * DN_{ps}
$$
with my main changes being unfolding $DN_{ps}$ and using lower case
for scalars.

Commit message:

mathjax instead of katex. Notes on problem with fitting (fixed).

docsite/content/docs/maths/index.md, after:

---
date: 2021-07-13
title: Image import maths
summary: This page describes how images are processed from import until reflectance.
tags: ["pcot","mars","python"]
---


{{< figure src="process.png" title="Image import and calibration">}}

## Step 1: Import

Multispectral images are first downloaded from the DAR or imported from
disk files (either as ENVI or separate PNG files). Such images may have up
to 11 bands.

## Step 2: Flat-fielding

Each camera has a set of pixel-to-pixel nonconformities which must be removed.
This is done by using a set of flat-field images, one per filter. Processing
is done by normalising each flat-field image (so each has a mean of 1) and
then dividing each band by the normalised flat-field for that band:
$$
Y = \frac{X}{|F|}
$$
{{<important>}}
Note: need more detail on how this normalisation is done. I also assume
we're storing the normalised data.
{{</important>}}

## Step 3: Conversion to radiance
We now produce a calibrated radiance image (W.m<sup>2</sup>.sr.nm). This
can be used directly (I believe) or carried forward. We use the equation[^1]
$$
Y_{\lambda} = \frac{k(t)X}{e_{\lambda}}
$$
in which
* $Y_\lambda$ is the output ($\lambda$ is the filter number)
* $k(t)$ is a radiance conversion coefficient dependent on the camera CCD's
temperature $t$
* $X$ is the input image (in *digital numbers*)
* $e_\lambda$ is the exposure time for filter $\lambda$


Here, $t$ and $e_\lambda$ come directly from image metadata, and
$k(t)$ will probably be a lookup table.
{{<important>}}
How do we get $k(t)$? It is likely to be something like
$$
k(t) = k_0 + k_s t
$$
from [2].
{{</important>}}


## Step 4: calculating illumination coefficients
Ideally, these should be captured from the image itself although
it's possible (?) that multiple images could share the same
coefficients if they are part of the same set (taken at the same time).

{{<important>}}
This is where it gets complicated, and I may have missed the point here
because it looks like the MER method (older) is much more complicated
than the method described in [1]. 
{{</important>}}

### The MER way (from paper [2])
* First, we have a BRDF model of the reflectance of the calibration targets.
That's a function $f_r(\omega_i, \omega_r)$ which (simply put) gives us the
ratio of light out to light in for all possible incidence and
reflection vectors (vector-to-light and vector-to-eye).
* We also have to factor dust composition into this, since it will modify
the BRDF.
* Analysts then select ROIs for each calibration target patch in each
filter band (well, obviously you can do this with one selection across
each multispectral image). Mean and SD of pixel values within each ROI
are calculated.
* For each filter, we then plot the measured values against the predicted 
(lab measured?) values for each
patch. This should fit a line constrained through the origin (because black
should equal black). The fit is checked by analysts, and the slope of the line $m$ 
can be used to convert from radiance to [IoF]({{<relref "../glossary/#iof">}})
$$
IoF = r\cdot m \cdot \cos(i)
$$
where $r$ is the radiance, $m$ is the slope of the line, and $i$ is the
incidence angle at the calibration target. We can then get $ R^* $ from
this by dividing by $\cos(i)$, so
$$
R^* = r\cdot m
$$

### The ExoSpec way (from paper [1])
Again, analysts select ROIs for each calibration target patch in each filter band, and obtain mean and
variance for pixel values within each ROI for each band. We then fit lines, and the paper seems to provide some
maths:
$$
\Delta = \sum_i \frac{1}{\sigma^2_i} \sum_i \frac{\rho^2_i}{\sigma^2_i}-\left(\sum_i \frac{\rho_i}{\sigma^2_i}\right)^2
$$
where $\sigma^2_i$ is the variance for patch ROI $i$ and $\rho_i$ is the lab-measured reflectance for that patch. This means that 
ROIs with larger uncertainty contribute less. 
{{<important>}}
[1] gets this from Matt's thesis [3], he gets it from Kirkup[4]. In [1] it's been copied wrongly with the $\Delta$ definition having $\rho_i^2$
in the numerator of the bracketed term.
{{</important>}}

Now we can do this:
$$
m = \frac{
\sum_i \frac{1}{\sigma^2_i}
\sum_i \frac{\rho_i s_i}{\sigma^2_i}-
\sum_i \frac{\rho_i}{\sigma^2_i}
\sum_i \frac{s_i}{\sigma^2_i}
}{\Delta}
$$
and
$$
c = \frac{
\sum_i \frac{\rho^2_i}{\sigma^2_i}
\sum_i \frac{s_i}{\sigma^2_i}-
\sum_i \frac{\rho_i}{\sigma^2_i}
\sum_i \frac{\rho_i s_i}{\sigma^2_i}
}{\Delta}
$$
where $s_i$ is the mean signal in W.m<sup>2</sup>.sr.nm for each ROI $i$. We can also obtain uncertainties in the form
of standard deviations of $m$ and $c$:
$$
\sigma_m = \sqrt{\frac{\sum_i \frac{1}{\sigma_i^2}}{\Delta}}
$$
and
$$
\sigma_c = \sqrt{\frac{\sum_i \frac{\rho_i^2}{\sigma_i^2}}{\Delta}}
$$


Sources: 
1. [Allender, Elyse J., et al. "The ExoMars spectral tool (ExoSpec): An image analysis tool for ExoMars 2020 PanCam imagery." Image and Signal Processing for Remote Sensing XXIV. Vol. 10789. International Society for Optics and Photonics, 2018.](https://research-repository.st-andrews.ac.uk/bitstream/handle/10023/16973/Allender_2018_ExoMars_SPIE_107890I.pdf)
2. [Bell III, James F., et al. "In-flight calibration and performance of the Mars Exploration Rover Panoramic Camera (Pancam) instruments." Journal of Geophysical Research: Planets 111.E2 (2006).](https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdfdirect/10.1029/2005JE002444)
3. Gunn M., Spectral imaging for Mars exploration. PhD thesis, Aberystwyth University (2013)
4. Kirkup, L., Experimental Methods An introduction to the analysis and presentation of data. 1994: John Wiley & Sons INC.


[^1]: This equation is given in Allender et al. as 
$$
RC_{\lambda} = K(T) * DN_{ps}
$$
with my main changes being unfolding $DN_{ps}$ and using lower case
for scalars.
