mkdocs/docs/devguide/nodeser.md, before:

# Node serialisation

Nodes typically store parameters and data as attributes of their `XForm`
objects. It's not really "polite" programming, but this is the kind of thing
you can do with Python. For example, the *expr* node contains a string also
called *expr*, which is the expression to be run. These values are initialised in
the constructor for the node's `XFormType`.

When you write nodes you will probably need to save and load some of these values,
both to files and so that the undo mechanism will work.

This process - converting node data into data which can be saved to archives -
is called **serialisation**, and there no less than four different mechanisms
for doing it. This is largely for historical reasons, but also because the
different mechanisms serve different needs:

* **autoserialisation** - for when your data is already JSON-serialisable and you 
don't need to edit it from a parameter file
(see [batch mode](/userguide/batch)).
* **complex serialisation** - for when your data is not directly JSON-serialisable (for example,
regions of interest) and you don't need to edit it from a parameter file.
* **TaggedAggregate serialisation** - the data is JSON-serialisable but we want to make it possible to
edit it from a parameter file. **Probably the best choice if you can.**
* **complex serialisation via TaggedAggregate** - the data is not serialisable, but we want to
edit it from a parameter file. **Probably the second-best.**

## Autoserialisation

In the simplest case, the data stored in the `XForm` object for a particular
node is already JSON-serialisable: that is, it is either a Python
primitive type (number, string, tuple, list or dict) or a Numpy array
(PCOT handles serialising these automatically). In this case you can simply
list the names of the attributes in a tuple called `autoserialise` in the `XFormType`,
along with some defaults which are used in case the items are not found in the saved data.

For example, the constructor for `XFormSpectrum` looks like this:

```python
        super().__init__("spectrum", "data", "0.0.0")
        self.autoserialise = ('sortlist', 'errorbarmode', 'legendFontSize', 'axisFontSize', 'stackSep', 'labelFontSize',
                              'bottomSpace', 'colourmode', 'rightSpace',
                              # these have defaults because they were developed later.
                              ('ignorePixSD', False),
                              ('bandwidthmode', BANDWIDTHMODE_NONE),
                              )
        for i in range(NUMINPUTS):
            self.addInputConnector(str(i), Datum.IMG, "a single line in the plot")
        self.addOutputConnector("data", Datum.DATA, "a CSV output (use 'dump' or 'sink' to read it)")
```
Note that the default values are optional - if you don't specify a default you can just
use the attribute name rather than a `(name, default)` tuple, but you will get an error if
you try to load from data which doesn't have that attribute stored.

When the system serialises the node it will read the named fields from the node, and it will
do the reverse when it deserialises a node (i.e. load it from an archive).

## Complex serialisation

In this case, we have data which isn't JSON-serialisable. We have to provide code to do this.
This is done by adding `serialise` and `deserialise` methods to the `XFormType` to 
convert our data to and from data
which is JSON-serialisable. The `serialise` method will take the node and return a dict
(which is JSON-serialisable), while the `deserialise` method will take the node and the dict
and set the appropriate values a newly created node. The dict returned by `serialise` will be merged
with the dict generated by autoserialisation and other, general node data (e.g. canvas data). 
Make sure you use unique names and not any of:
```txt
canvas, displayName, inputTypes, ins, outs, mapping, md5, type, ver, w, xy, outputTypes
```

An example: imagine our node stores a list of objects of some class
`Foo`. We could write our methods thus:

```python
def serialise(self, node):
    return {'foolist': [(x.a, x.b) for x in node.foo_list]}

def deserialise(self, node, d):
    node.foo_list = [Foo(a, b) for a, b in d['foolist']]
```    
In this case we are converting the Foo objects into tuples to serialise them,
and constructing them from the tuples when we deserialise. It would probably be
better to write `Foo` so that it can serialise itself and has a deserialise constructor:

```
class Foo:
    def __init__(self...):
        ...
        
    def serialise(self)->dict:
        return ...
        
    @staticmethod
    def deserialise(d: dict):
        return Foo(...)
```

and

```python
def serialise(self, node):
    return {'foolist': [x.serialise() for x in node.foo_list]}
    
def deserialise(self, node, d):
    node.foo_list = [Foo.deserialise(x) for x in d['foolist']]
```    

## TaggedAggregate serialisation

This is the method we use when we want to be able to edit the parameters of nodes in batch mode,
using parameter files (see [batch mode](/userguide/batch)). It is probably the best method
to use because of this, but it is rather more complicated.

We make use of **tagged aggregate structures**, which can be found in
`pcot.utils.taggedaggregate`. These are dictionaries and lists, but
each has a formal, typed structure with "tags" giving the names of the
members, their types, and default values. Each is described by a type
singleton object

For example, here is a `TaggedDictType` definition for a rectangle. 
This is for an ordered dict, so it will be serialised
to a tuple. Hopefully it is self-explanatory:

```python
taggedRectType = TaggedDictType(
    x=("The x coordinate of the top left corner", Number, 0),
    y=("The y coordinate of the top left corner", Number, 0),
    w=("The width of the rectangle", Number, 10),
    h=("The height of the rectangle", Number, 10)).setOrdered()
```
@@@info
Bear in mind that there are functions for generating rectangle and colour type object in
pcot.utils.taggedaggregates: taggedColourType and taggedRectType. You probably shouldn't
create a rectangle type yourself.
@@@

This could then be embedded in a `TaggedDictType`:
```python
taggedThingType = TaggedDictType(
    rect=("The rectangle", taggedRectType),
    somenumber=("Some numerical value",Number,0))
```
which we could then form into a list:
```python
listOfThingsType = TaggedListType("list of things",taggedThingType,0)  # default zero means empty list
```
We could then create a new list and add things like this:
```python
listOfThings = TaggedListType.create()
listOfThings.append_default()
```    
We can then access these items:
```python
print(listOfThings[0].rect.x)
```
For more details on how to use these structures, read the tests in `tests/test_taggedaggs.py`.

@@@info
You might wonder why we don't make all tagged dicts ordered, so they
are all serialised as tuples. The answer is that doing that would make
it harder to implement backcompatibility - if we serialise as a tuple,
adding and removing fields in the future becomes difficult. Only 
use ordered dicts for things like rectangles, where we are very unlikely
to change the structure. In fact, I'm only doing it for legacy support.
@@@

You'll note that all the elements of a TaggedAggregate structure are JSON-serialisable, although
some can be numpy arrays. However, the nature of the structure allows defaults - and documentation -
to be generated automatically.

To use a TaggedAggregate to serialise node data, create a `TaggedDictType ` and assign
it to the `params` member of the `XFormType` in the constructor. For example:
```python
        self.params = TaggedDictType(
            mul=("multiplicative factor (done first)", float, 1.0),
            add=("additive constant (done last)", float, 0.0))
```
When a new node is created, a default structure will be created from this type and stored in the
node's `params` field where it can be accessed:
```python
output = node.params.add + node.params.mul * node.getInput(0, Datum.IMG)
```
When the node is serialised, the structure will be serialised.

## complex TaggedAggregate serialisation

The previous method dealt with data which can be JSON-serialised directly. If we need to modify
non-JSON-serialisable data with parameter files, we need to do something similar to the
complex serialisation method described above but going through a TaggedAggregate: we set the
TaggedAggregate from our complex data, and then PCOT will serialise that.

To do this, we create a `params` in the type as we did in the previous section, containing
a TaggedDictType which we will build from our actual data.

Again we write `serialise` and `deserialise` methods in `XFormType`. This time,
however, we use `serialise` to create a `node.params` structure which will be automatically saved
on return:

```python
def serialise(self, node):
    node.params = TaggedDict(self.params)
    
    # fill in the node.params with data
    node.params.foo = some_data_or_other
    node.params.bar = some_data_or_other
    

    # we don't return anything, because node.params will have been set to
    # represent our data; we don't need to add anything directly to the
    # JSON-serialisable dict.
    
    return None

def deserialise(self, node, _):
    # we ignore the dictionary, because we will be working with the JSON-serialisable version
    # of our data that is stored in the TaggedAggregate in node.params
    
    our_data = some_function_of(node.params.foo, node.params.bar)
```

## Maybe

Types and TaggedAggregate type objects can be "wrapped" in `Maybe` objects if they might be null:
```python
    tdt = TaggedDictType(
        a=("a", int, 10),
        b=("b", Maybe(str), "foo"),        # string or null
        c=("c", float, 3.14)
    )
    td = tdt.create()           # create new dict
    td.b = "hello"              # this is fine
    td.b = None                 # and so is this
```

@@@info
Note: I would have used Optional from the typing package, but that can only take actual types -
not the type objects we use here.
@@@

## TaggedVariantDicts

Sometimes it is necessary to store different kinds of object in a list. We can do this with
TaggedAggregates, provided the objects are all TaggedDicts and there is a field in all the dicts
which tells us which type it is - a "discriminator". For example, we can create two dict types:

```python
    tdt1 = TaggedDictType(
        a=("a", int, 10),
        b=("b", str, "foo"),
        c=("c", float, 3.14)
    )
    tdt2 = TaggedDictType(
        a=("a", int, 10),
        b=("b", float, 3.14),
        d=("d", str, "wibble"),
        e=("e", bool, False)
    )
```
and wrap them both in a TaggedVariantDictType:
```python
    tvdt = TaggedVariantDictType("type",
                                 {
                                        "type1": tdt1,
                                        "type2": tdt2
                                    })
```
Here, the discriminator is a field called "type",
and value "type1" tells us it must be of the first type defined above. We don't necessarily need
to define field in the dict types, because the variant wrapper will add it automatically.

We can now create a list of these variants:
```python
    tl = TaggedListType("stuff", tvdt, 0)
    ll = tl.create()
```
create a "type 1" dict:
```python
    d = tdt1.create()
```
create a new variant wrapper and set it to that new dict:
```python
    t = tvdt.create().set(d)
```
and append it to the list:
```python
    ll.append(t)
```
To examine an item, we can get its discriminator value:
```
    assert ll[0].get_type() == 'type1'
```
and get the item itself with the `get` method in the variant:
```
    assert ll[0].get().a == 10
```




### A footnote: ROIs

ROIs are a bit complicated. All ROIs have a set of attributes in common, and each subtype has
some extra. To do that, we have code like this:

```python
BASEROIFIELDS = [
    ("type", ("type", str, "")),
    ("label", ("label", Maybe(str), "")),
    ("labeltop", ("label on top?", bool, False)),
    ("colour", ("colour", ROICOLOURTYPE)),
    ("thickness", ("thickness", Number, 0)),
    ("fontsize", ("fontsize", Number, 10)),
    ("drawbg", ("draw background", bool, True)),
    ("drawBox", ("draw box", bool, True)),
    ("drawEdge", ("draw edge", bool, True)),
]

# ...

class ROIRect(ROI):
    """Rectangular ROI"""
    tpname = "rect"
    # build the tagged dict structure we use for serialising rects - it's a tagged dict with the fields
    # of a rect, plus the base ROI fields.
    TAGGEDDICTDEFINITION = BASEROIFIELDS + [
        ('bb', ('rectangle', rectType)),
        ('isset', ('is rectangle set? (internal)', bool, False))]

    TAGGEDDICT = TaggedDictType(*TAGGEDDICTDEFINITION)
```
so that `ROIRect.TAGGEDDICT` is a type definition for all the fields we need. We then have methods
in each ROI:

* `to_tagged_dict(self)` will convert the ROI to the right kind of tagged dict
* `from_tagged_dict(self,td)` will set the current ROI from its tagged dict

and then `ROI.new_from_tagged_dict(td)` will create an ROI from a tagged dict; it will inspect the
type field to see what type is. 

The *multidot* node uses this system in quite a complex way, because it needs to be able to store
a list of different ROIs. It does this using a list of variant dicts - here are the type definitions:

```python
class XFormMultidot(XFormType):
    # ...
    
    TAGGEDVDICT = TaggedVariantDictType("type",
                                        {
                                            "painted": ROIPainted.TAGGEDDICT,
                                            "circle": ROICircle.TAGGEDDICT
                                        })

    TAGGEDLIST = TaggedListType("rois", TAGGEDVDICT, 0)
```
Here is the `serialise` method:
```python
def serialise(self, node):
    # create the list of ROI data
    lst = self.TAGGEDLIST.create()
    for r in node.rois:
        # for each ROI, convert to a TaggedDict
        d = r.to_tagged_dict()
        # wrap it in a TaggedVariantDict and store it in the list
        dv = self.TAGGEDVDICT.create().set(d)
        lst.append(dv)

    node.params = TaggedDict(self.params)
    node.params.rois = lst
    # and don't return anything, because we've stored the data in node.params.
    return None
```
and here is the `deserialise` method:
```python
    def deserialise(self, node, d):
        # get the TaggedList of variant dicts
        lst = node.params.rois

        rs = []
        for x in lst:
            d = x.get()
            roi = ROI.new_from_tagged_dict(d)
            rs.append(roi)

        # filter out any zero-radius circles
        node.rois = [r for r in rs if isinstance(r, ROIPainted) or r.r > 0]
```

Commit message:

nodeser notes on not using TAs in a Maybe.

mkdocs/docs/devguide/nodeser.md, after:

# Node serialisation

Nodes typically store parameters and data as attributes of their `XForm`
objects. It's not really "polite" programming, but this is the kind of thing
you can do with Python. For example, the *expr* node contains a string also
called *expr*, which is the expression to be run. These values are initialised in
the constructor for the node's `XFormType`.

When you write nodes you will probably need to save and load some of these values,
both to files and so that the undo mechanism will work.

This process - converting node data into data which can be saved to archives -
is called **serialisation**, and there no less than four different mechanisms
for doing it. This is largely for historical reasons, but also because the
different mechanisms serve different needs:

* **autoserialisation** - for when your data is already JSON-serialisable and you 
don't need to edit it from a parameter file
(see [batch mode](/userguide/batch)).
* **complex serialisation** - for when your data is not directly JSON-serialisable (for example,
regions of interest) and you don't need to edit it from a parameter file.
* **TaggedAggregate serialisation** - the data is JSON-serialisable but we want to make it possible to
edit it from a parameter file. **Probably the best choice if you can.**
* **complex serialisation via TaggedAggregate** - the data is not serialisable, but we want to
edit it from a parameter file. **Probably the second-best.**

## Autoserialisation

In the simplest case, the data stored in the `XForm` object for a particular
node is already JSON-serialisable: that is, it is either a Python
primitive type (number, string, tuple, list or dict) or a Numpy array
(PCOT handles serialising these automatically). In this case you can simply
list the names of the attributes in a tuple called `autoserialise` in the `XFormType`,
along with some defaults which are used in case the items are not found in the saved data.

For example, the constructor for `XFormSpectrum` looks like this:

```python
        super().__init__("spectrum", "data", "0.0.0")
        self.autoserialise = ('sortlist', 'errorbarmode', 'legendFontSize', 'axisFontSize', 'stackSep', 'labelFontSize',
                              'bottomSpace', 'colourmode', 'rightSpace',
                              # these have defaults because they were developed later.
                              ('ignorePixSD', False),
                              ('bandwidthmode', BANDWIDTHMODE_NONE),
                              )
        for i in range(NUMINPUTS):
            self.addInputConnector(str(i), Datum.IMG, "a single line in the plot")
        self.addOutputConnector("data", Datum.DATA, "a CSV output (use 'dump' or 'sink' to read it)")
```
Note that the default values are optional - if you don't specify a default you can just
use the attribute name rather than a `(name, default)` tuple, but you will get an error if
you try to load from data which doesn't have that attribute stored.

When the system serialises the node it will read the named fields from the node, and it will
do the reverse when it deserialises a node (i.e. load it from an archive).

## Complex serialisation

In this case, we have data which isn't JSON-serialisable. We have to provide code to do this.
This is done by adding `serialise` and `deserialise` methods to the `XFormType` to 
convert our data to and from data
which is JSON-serialisable. The `serialise` method will take the node and return a dict
(which is JSON-serialisable), while the `deserialise` method will take the node and the dict
and set the appropriate values a newly created node. The dict returned by `serialise` will be merged
with the dict generated by autoserialisation and other, general node data (e.g. canvas data). 
Make sure you use unique names and not any of:
```txt
canvas, displayName, inputTypes, ins, outs, mapping, md5, type, ver, w, xy, outputTypes
```

An example: imagine our node stores a list of objects of some class
`Foo`. We could write our methods thus:

```python
def serialise(self, node):
    return {'foolist': [(x.a, x.b) for x in node.foo_list]}

def deserialise(self, node, d):
    node.foo_list = [Foo(a, b) for a, b in d['foolist']]
```    
In this case we are converting the Foo objects into tuples to serialise them,
and constructing them from the tuples when we deserialise. It would probably be
better to write `Foo` so that it can serialise itself and has a deserialise constructor:

```
class Foo:
    def __init__(self...):
        ...
        
    def serialise(self)->dict:
        return ...
        
    @staticmethod
    def deserialise(d: dict):
        return Foo(...)
```

and

```python
def serialise(self, node):
    return {'foolist': [x.serialise() for x in node.foo_list]}
    
def deserialise(self, node, d):
    node.foo_list = [Foo.deserialise(x) for x in d['foolist']]
```    

## TaggedAggregate serialisation

This is the method we use when we want to be able to edit the parameters of nodes in batch mode,
using parameter files (see [batch mode](/userguide/batch)). It is probably the best method
to use because of this, but it is rather more complicated.

We make use of **tagged aggregate structures**, which can be found in
`pcot.utils.taggedaggregate`. These are dictionaries and lists, but
each has a formal, typed structure with "tags" giving the names of the
members, their types, and default values. Each is described by a type
singleton object

For example, here is a `TaggedDictType` definition for a rectangle. 
This is for an ordered dict, so it will be serialised
to a tuple. Hopefully it is self-explanatory:

```python
taggedRectType = TaggedDictType(
    x=("The x coordinate of the top left corner", Number, 0),
    y=("The y coordinate of the top left corner", Number, 0),
    w=("The width of the rectangle", Number, 10),
    h=("The height of the rectangle", Number, 10)).setOrdered()
```
@@@info
Bear in mind that there are functions for generating rectangle and colour type object in
pcot.utils.taggedaggregates: taggedColourType and taggedRectType. You probably shouldn't
create a rectangle type yourself.
@@@

This could then be embedded in a `TaggedDictType`:
```python
taggedThingType = TaggedDictType(
    rect=("The rectangle", taggedRectType),
    somenumber=("Some numerical value",Number,0))
```
which we could then form into a list:
```python
listOfThingsType = TaggedListType("list of things",taggedThingType,0)  # default zero means empty list
```
We could then create a new list and add things like this:
```python
listOfThings = TaggedListType.create()
listOfThings.append_default()
```    
We can then access these items:
```python
print(listOfThings[0].rect.x)
```
For more details on how to use these structures, read the tests in `tests/test_taggedaggs.py`.

@@@info
You might wonder why we don't make all tagged dicts ordered, so they
are all serialised as tuples. The answer is that doing that would make
it harder to implement backcompatibility - if we serialise as a tuple,
adding and removing fields in the future becomes difficult. Only 
use ordered dicts for things like rectangles, where we are very unlikely
to change the structure. In fact, I'm only doing it for legacy support.
@@@

You'll note that all the elements of a TaggedAggregate structure are JSON-serialisable, although
some can be numpy arrays. However, the nature of the structure allows defaults - and documentation -
to be generated automatically.

To use a TaggedAggregate to serialise node data, create a `TaggedDictType ` and assign
it to the `params` member of the `XFormType` in the constructor. For example:
```python
        self.params = TaggedDictType(
            mul=("multiplicative factor (done first)", float, 1.0),
            add=("additive constant (done last)", float, 0.0))
```
When a new node is created, a default structure will be created from this type and stored in the
node's `params` field where it can be accessed:
```python
output = node.params.add + node.params.mul * node.getInput(0, Datum.IMG)
```
When the node is serialised, the structure will be serialised.

## complex TaggedAggregate serialisation

The previous method dealt with data which can be JSON-serialised directly. If we need to modify
non-JSON-serialisable data with parameter files, we need to do something similar to the
complex serialisation method described above but going through a TaggedAggregate: we set the
TaggedAggregate from our complex data, and then PCOT will serialise that.

To do this, we create a `params` in the type as we did in the previous section, containing
a TaggedDictType which we will build from our actual data.

Again we write `serialise` and `deserialise` methods in `XFormType`. This time,
however, we use `serialise` to create a `node.params` structure which will be automatically saved
on return:

```python
def serialise(self, node):
    node.params = TaggedDict(self.params)
    
    # fill in the node.params with data
    node.params.foo = some_data_or_other
    node.params.bar = some_data_or_other
    

    # we don't return anything, because node.params will have been set to
    # represent our data; we don't need to add anything directly to the
    # JSON-serialisable dict.
    
    return None

def deserialise(self, node, _):
    # we ignore the dictionary, because we will be working with the JSON-serialisable version
    # of our data that is stored in the TaggedAggregate in node.params
    
    our_data = some_function_of(node.params.foo, node.params.bar)
```

## Maybe

Types and TaggedAggregate type objects can be "wrapped" in `Maybe` objects if they might be null:
```python
    tdt = TaggedDictType(
        a=("a", int, 10),
        b=("b", Maybe(str), "foo"),        # string or null
        c=("c", float, 3.14)
    )
    td = tdt.create()           # create new dict
    td.b = "hello"              # this is fine
    td.b = None                 # and so is this
```

@@@info
Note: I would have used Optional from the typing package, but that can only take actual types -
not the type objects we use here.
@@@

@@@danger
Avoid using Maybe for tagged aggregates etc., because you can't
*create* a new one using a parameter file, just modify values in an
existing one.
@@@

## TaggedVariantDicts

Sometimes it is necessary to store different kinds of object in a list. We can do this with
TaggedAggregates, provided the objects are all TaggedDicts and there is a field in all the dicts
which tells us which type it is - a "discriminator". For example, we can create two dict types:

```python
    tdt1 = TaggedDictType(
        a=("a", int, 10),
        b=("b", str, "foo"),
        c=("c", float, 3.14)
    )
    tdt2 = TaggedDictType(
        a=("a", int, 10),
        b=("b", float, 3.14),
        d=("d", str, "wibble"),
        e=("e", bool, False)
    )
```
and wrap them both in a TaggedVariantDictType:
```python
    tvdt = TaggedVariantDictType("type",
                                 {
                                        "type1": tdt1,
                                        "type2": tdt2
                                    })
```
Here, the discriminator is a field called "type",
and value "type1" tells us it must be of the first type defined above. We don't necessarily need
to define field in the dict types, because the variant wrapper will add it automatically.

We can now create a list of these variants:
```python
    tl = TaggedListType("stuff", tvdt, 0)
    ll = tl.create()
```
create a "type 1" dict:
```python
    d = tdt1.create()
```
create a new variant wrapper and set it to that new dict:
```python
    t = tvdt.create().set(d)
```
and append it to the list:
```python
    ll.append(t)
```
To examine an item, we can get its discriminator value:
```
    assert ll[0].get_type() == 'type1'
```
and get the item itself with the `get` method in the variant:
```
    assert ll[0].get().a == 10
```




### A footnote: ROIs

ROIs are a bit complicated. All ROIs have a set of attributes in common, and each subtype has
some extra. To do that, we have code like this:

```python
BASEROIFIELDS = [
    ("type", ("type", str, "")),
    ("label", ("label", Maybe(str), "")),
    ("labeltop", ("label on top?", bool, False)),
    ("colour", ("colour", ROICOLOURTYPE)),
    ("thickness", ("thickness", Number, 0)),
    ("fontsize", ("fontsize", Number, 10)),
    ("drawbg", ("draw background", bool, True)),
    ("drawBox", ("draw box", bool, True)),
    ("drawEdge", ("draw edge", bool, True)),
]

# ...

class ROIRect(ROI):
    """Rectangular ROI"""
    tpname = "rect"
    # build the tagged dict structure we use for serialising rects - it's a tagged dict with the fields
    # of a rect, plus the base ROI fields.
    TAGGEDDICTDEFINITION = BASEROIFIELDS + [
        ('bb', ('rectangle', rectType)),
        ('isset', ('is rectangle set? (internal)', bool, False))]

    TAGGEDDICT = TaggedDictType(*TAGGEDDICTDEFINITION)
```
so that `ROIRect.TAGGEDDICT` is a type definition for all the fields we need. We then have methods
in each ROI:

* `to_tagged_dict(self)` will convert the ROI to the right kind of tagged dict
* `from_tagged_dict(self,td)` will set the current ROI from its tagged dict

and then `ROI.new_from_tagged_dict(td)` will create an ROI from a tagged dict; it will inspect the
type field to see what type is. 

The *multidot* node uses this system in quite a complex way, because it needs to be able to store
a list of different ROIs. It does this using a list of variant dicts - here are the type definitions:

```python
class XFormMultidot(XFormType):
    # ...
    
    TAGGEDVDICT = TaggedVariantDictType("type",
                                        {
                                            "painted": ROIPainted.TAGGEDDICT,
                                            "circle": ROICircle.TAGGEDDICT
                                        })

    TAGGEDLIST = TaggedListType("rois", TAGGEDVDICT, 0)
```
Here is the `serialise` method:
```python
def serialise(self, node):
    # create the list of ROI data
    lst = self.TAGGEDLIST.create()
    for r in node.rois:
        # for each ROI, convert to a TaggedDict
        d = r.to_tagged_dict()
        # wrap it in a TaggedVariantDict and store it in the list
        dv = self.TAGGEDVDICT.create().set(d)
        lst.append(dv)

    node.params = TaggedDict(self.params)
    node.params.rois = lst
    # and don't return anything, because we've stored the data in node.params.
    return None
```
and here is the `deserialise` method:
```python
    def deserialise(self, node, d):
        # get the TaggedList of variant dicts
        lst = node.params.rois

        rs = []
        for x in lst:
            d = x.get()
            roi = ROI.new_from_tagged_dict(d)
            rs.append(roi)

        # filter out any zero-radius circles
        node.rois = [r for r in rs if isinstance(r, ROIPainted) or r.r > 0]
```
