# Release procedure

To make a new release, follow this checklist.

1. Create a new version number and codeword. For the version number, use
   [semantic versioning](https://semver.org). This means:
    * Version number in MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH format
    * append "-alpha" if we are still in alpha
    * increment the MAJOR number if backward incompatible changes are introduced
    * increment the MINOR number if new, backward compatible changes are introduced
      OR if deprecating functionality.
    * increment the PATCH number if backward compatible bug fixes are introduced
    * The version codeword is a helpful mnemonic. We were
      using a script to generate [Rainbow codes](http://pale.org/rainbow.php), but
      we've now moved on to [Megalithic sites in the UK](https://m.megalithic.co.uk/asb_mapsquare.php)
      running through letters of the alphabet and roughly south to north,
      trying to stick with more memorable names.
1. Edit **PCOT/src/pcot/VERSION.txt** to add the new version data, also
   specifying the date (in ISO 8601, YYYY-MM-DD format).
1. Edit **PCOT/pyproject.toml** to add the new version data.
1. Run **poetry install** on both Windows and Linux and check PCOT
   still runs (and that the title bar and About version data is correct)
1. Run **generate_autodocs.py** in **mkdocs/docs** to get up-to-date
   autodocs.
1. Create a list of the changes by looking at the Git log and add this
   to **PCOT/mkdocs/docs/releases.md** under a new section for the new
   release.
1. Make **pyInstaller** builds for Windows and Linux. Do this
   by going into the **pyInstaller** directory on the required platform
   and running **pyinstaller file.spec**. Check each build works,
   fixing if necessary. Note that the splash screen will
   have been automatically generated by the **file.spec** file from the 
   VERSION.txt, so if it looks weird, check here.
1. Make a MacOS pyInstaller build. This is more complex, and is shown
   below.
1. Upload to the release repo (see below).
1. Upload the docs to the documentation site.
1. Make sure the dev branch is merged into the master branch.
1. Make a release tag in the repository.


## Making a MacOS build

This is currently a bit more complicated because I'm having to
commandeer a teaching machine to do it on.


## Uploading to the release repo

This currently uses Jim Finnis' Femtomine server system.
I'm not going to talk about how Femtomine works here - it's a fairly
complex command-line app (at least for adding data). Assuming you
have installed FM and the remote mine link is set up, the commands
to add the new files and set the text metadata are:

```sh
femtomine add pcot_windows.exe --tkey=brief_md --textfile=windows_note +new +v0.2.0
femtomine add pcot_linux.exe --tkey=brief_md --textfile=linux_note +new +v0.2.0
femtomine add pcot_macos.exe --tkey=brief_md --textfile=macos_note +new +v0.2.0
```
assuming that all files are in the current working directory - and you'll have to change
the version number tag! 

This will take some time, and the new items will not appear in the query results until their tags
are set. Once they are uploaded, set this up by first removing the "latest" tag from the current
latest items and then adding tags to the newly uploaded items:
```sh
femtomine mod :latest +latest
femtomine mod :new,+latest,+pcot,+apps +new
```


